---
type: page
title: Illusions and Reality
date : 2022-03-06
---

Illusion of a heaven is far worse than reality of a hell. Illusion is a psychotic drug: in keeping you away from reality, it prevents you from adapting to reality. Getting addicted to illusion therefore is like a time bomb, which will lead to your ultimate divorce from reality and subsequent death. It is dangerous, more so when its voluntary. For you can console yourself if you are unknowingly pushed into the mire, but one who willingly deceives himself wakes up to a rude and guilty mirror that doesn't forgive him for long. Many can't bear that trauma. Many take years to recover. In any way, your youth is lost and the best phase of your life is sold to the devil. Illusion breeds regret and mediocrity. And it only happens to a brilliant person, one who can serve as a fodder for the devil. Only water at a height can fall to drive energy, and so only those who are geniuses fall prey to self-illusion. Let me explain. Consider a young lazy tiger. He is absolutely capable of supreme hunting, he can feel that confidence in his own ability. He can sense the heat of youth bubbling within him. Nothing is impossible for him. But he is out of practice and too relaxed: he feels nobody can harm him, not even his own callousness. Little half-hearted efforts have been awarding him with good hunts. Older tigers fail to understand how can such a disinterested fellow succeed in his bluemoon leaps. They think he must be a genius, and so does the young tiger think of himself. This self-illusion would prove costly for him later. Things change when a bunch of hardworking young tigers enter the scene and knock him out of business. The lazy tiger is shocked, he becomes furious, but he can't make his place. He never had that fighting spirit. He spends his time in regret, sobs, fury and indulging in even more illusion to vent out his youthful energy. Soon he realizes that he's lost his youth and has become a mediocre creature. The genius who was blest with colossal inborn abilities, sold himself to the Devil-in-disguise.  Unless you have a strong moral discipline, you will give in to the dark side of the force as Skywalker did to Sidious or Dr. Jekyll to Mr. Hyde. Didn't the same thing happen to Ravana when he abused the Vardaan given by Lord Shiva. The boon became a bane. The table-knife can also be misused to kill a person. Nuclear power can be used for both good and bad. Human mind can be used for both good and bad. Youthful energy can be used for both good and bad. These are dual-use technologies and hence most dangerous. Unless you have an equable and unfluttered march of self-belief over the thin rope of life, you will fall prey to using the bad side of the technology because it is so tempting, and the temptation is generously sponsored by the Devil, and it is addictive. Nuclear arms race and proliferation is a result of such addiction. Repeated offences are a result of such addictions. Obsessive-compulsive disorders are a result of such addictions. Repeated failures are a result of such addictions. Unless de-addiction regimes are carried out, such addictions will lead to death. Deaths due to substance abuse gain conspicuosness in public eye, but deaths due to these addictions are seldom felt. People soon accept mediocrity to be the new normal. But as Benjamin Franklin had said:" Some people die at 25 but aren't buried until they're 75", I believe succumbing to mediocrity is the effective end of your life. <br>

Apart from self-illusion, another illuding chimera is that someone else is helping or supporting you. The illusion of support is far worse than the reality of helplessness. Atleast helplessness helps you stand on your own feet. It gives you room to swing your steel and fight alone. It enables you to give your best shot, so that dying in harness owes nothing to regret. Malcolm X often used the allegory of the fox and wolf in his speeches. The wolf is better than the fox, because its appearance matches its reality. Living close to reality is the best thing you can do in your life. Having contact with the ground is the surest way to conquer the sky. Reality somehow has a mix of the smooth and rough, of day and night in such proportion that you truly become a man, that you grow with a strong spine and a sense of purpose. Reality is not so glamourous. There are people in the world fighting poverty, wars, unemployment, pollution, the heat of the desert and cold of the hills. Face it. There is aging, disease, injury and death as an accepted truth of reality. Face it. There are assignments, homeworks, exams, travels, hardworks every moment of your life. Face it. Without these it is not life, it is illusion. And the illusion of life is far worse than death. That is why people opt for euthanasia. If you have lost touch with reality, then you should also opt for the same. You can keep your eyes, ears and mind engaged in multimedia, music and illusion, but when they stop you hear the silence of reality, and that is the desert sand, the rest was mirage. <br>

In recent years, a global corporate-political lobby, with vested interests, has set out to maximise their power, security and profits by corrupting the younger generation. They are working out a very long-term hypermetropic plan to make human population dependant upon supportive machines. They treat human beings like numbers and robots and any presence of human creativity is a threat to them. These lobbyists are merciless and shrewd. They want everybody to get involved in social media, virtual reality and immersive experiences to such an extent that people lose patience and interest in reality. The ensuing addiction will dim their mind and stop them from questioning or boycotting the illusion. It will also create an army of loyal customers for various future bad technologies, which will legitimise immorality and everything bad in the guise of the new normal. In short, without discovering the cure to death, or a regime of spiritual peace, or a time machine, or an immortal youth, or any of the inventions which really matter to the human civilisation, these lobbyists are using dirty tactics to open a floodgate of cheap money for the next hundred years. The result is a generation of disabled, crooked, immature, diseased people, who live like robots and succumb to a cardiac arrest or stroke at a young age; and if spared, fall prey to the latest variant of biological weapons. These lobbyists themselves however, are extremely grounded to reality, and are therefore safe: its just that they feel there aren't enough resources in the world for everyone to feel safe ! Dangerous they are ! <br>

Wake up friends ! Wake up from this slumber of illusion. You have been drugged by the Devil operating through lobbyists, illusions and procrastinations. Bad habits have been squeezing you. You have forgotten your true identity, you have forgotten that you are the son of God. You may have fallen, but you can still rise to greater heights. I am merely reiterating the alarm that Swami Vivekananda rung more than a century back. But this is a renewed need of the day. You may be from any country, culture or religion. But if you truly want to realise yourself and break free from the shackles of this disease, adopt the true ancient Indian culture. Therein lies the strength and wisdom of the sages and the ages. Therein lies solace, stability and sacrifice. Renounce the dross: its too heavy a burden to carry through your life. Maintain discipline. Wake up early. Have a deep voice. Talk heavy but less. Read more. Excel in an outdoor sport. Stay happy and at peace with yourself. Engage your mind in creative imaginations about your subject, so that you excel in your profession at a superior level. Respect your elders. Always look skyward. Be a man with a spine of steel. <br>

