---
type: post
title: Managing resources digitally
---

Monitoring resources of a country is the utmost priority of the government. Assuming the government as the Political System described in Easton’s Systems Theory, it must be admitted that the increasing digitization in the feedback component of the theory is serving to complement the human element by empowering citizens with digital data that they cannot sense themselves but with whose consequences they live everyday. Take for instance the issue of subsidized urea. Before the introduction of Soil Health Cards, the knowledge of skewed nutrient ratios in soils throughout India was known only sporadically and chartlessly. After rolling the Soil Health Card programme, the nationwide trend became not just clear, but by virtue of making an updatable database akin to the Aadhaar, it has set the stage for continuous future improvements which tends towards perfection. It has also paved the way for an efficiently assessable Nutrient Based Subsidy scheme wherein subsidy depends on the quality of soil and wherein urea may ultimately be included. Thus this monitoring framework has empowered both the farmer and the government. Efforts to narrow down the scheme from the grid level to individual farm level are progressive because any digital monitoring scheme gives best results at high resolution. The digital nature of such a monitoring system is of crucial importance because digitization invariably makes a process modular, so that data, which can now be gathered more frequently and accurately, can not only be analysed by advanced analytics and artificial intelligence based algorithms, but is also fungible enough to be plugged in as inputs for other government processes, like target delivery of services in various government schemes. This naturally may provoke privacy concerns in the minds of the critics : but that can be addressed by robust Data Protection Laws like the PDP Bill, made after incorporating the opinions of both the general public and of expert committees. Such laws will also allow the government to move to a hybrid model wherein a less critical part of its sensor data can be stored on private cloud while keeping the rest on On-premises data centres.<br>
<br>
Another example is the Public Distribution System (PDS) in India. There are a legion of reforms possible in it but none is more enduring or effective than making the entire system digitized and transparent to the public. There is no privacy concern in sharing the macro details of PDS with the public in a real-time visualised online dashboard similar to the stock exchange metrics or the task manager of a server, perhaps linking it with the eGram Swaraj portal as well. There may however be technical difficulties due to the scale of operations. But digital platforms are built for big data.<br>
<br>
Now consider the current Covid-19 pandemic. Why has the whole world been stumped by it? Its for the same reason a man is stumped by an unexpected heart attack or an old technology is stumped by a disruptive one : the lack of preparedness to bear a volcano which has been silently brewing for years under the hood. In human history, there has not been a disease which combines high infectiousness and a long pre-symptomatic period of transmission and proliferation as good as Covid-19 does. The health monitoring systems throughout the world are not designed for such a disease. The lockdowns resemble a computer which hangs when it can’t understand what to do. Lockdowns are however the best way at present to save human lives. But the pandemic has revealed the necessity to continuously monitor individual and community health parameters just as other digital monitorings I have mentioned earlier. The activation barrier is the suitable measurement technology. The Aarogya Setu app, the Mother & Child Tracking System, etc. are tiny steps by the government in that direction, but it should not come as a surprise if we all have Aadhaar-linked biochip implants as a part of the eGovernance framework by the end of this century, for the larger good of humankind. Privacy issues? Well, just as diamonds cut diamonds, the solution lies in Technology itself.<br>
<br>
Finally there is financial e-monitoring. The 15th Finance Commission had recommended making the Public Financial Management System as statutory. If seriously upgraded, it can not only make fund flows in  public projects and services more efficient but can also invade the private sector, just like UPI did in the payments realm, and render stiff competition to existing systems like SAP-ERP.<br>
<br>
Apart from monitoring, shuffling of resources across sectors becomes of strategic importance in a fast-changing world. These sectors are like stars in the universe. One dies and another is born. Data storage was shuffled from magnetic drives to discs to flash drives and now cloud storage seems to subvert them all. Like the entropy of the universe increases in every process, so also every shuffling shifts the track invariably towards digitization. Lets consider another example : Consider APMC Mandi sector as the intermediary between farmers and warehouses/wholesalers. There are a lot of resources invested in this sector at present. However they are bound to become obsolete after a few years when technologies like the e-NAM link more Farmer Producer Organisations with Warehouses in far more effective ways and bypass the mandis. What about the resources invested in the mandi sector : they will have to be shuffled out. This shuffling can take place out of choice (due to a gradual wave of modernization) or out of compulsion (due to a crisis like Covid-19 where such technologies help bypass the vulnerable segments of the supply chain). If we don’t expedite the former, we’ll be thrust into the latter. But shuffling here is not a game of cards. In essence, there are 4 types of allocatable resources : man, money, natural resources & infrastructure. Shuffling money and natural  resources is easier. In our example, money investment and natural resources (like mandi land, crops,etc) can easily be shuffled from mandis to the e-NAM sector. Shuffling manpower and infrastructure is however difficult and, without exhaustive advance planning, can lead to crises like unemployment and stagnation of outdated infrastructure. Now consider an auto manufacturer which makes a car that can be converted to a driverless car when the right technology develops or has hybrid features. This is an example of a general-purpose asset as contrasted with a unifunctional one. This concept of general-purpose assets can help with infrastructure shuffling. Similarly a properly designed, future-looking skill development ecosystem, with special focus on skilling in emerging technologies, can help avert unemployment during manpower shuffling.<br>


-	BY RAMAN BUTTA


