---
layout: page
title: Trump's Ukraine Policy - March 2025
date : 2025-03-03
---


I see a lot of people are criticising Donald Trump and praising will all the Zelinsky and Europe’s support to continuing Ukraine‘s effort in the Russo Ukraine war, but I feel that just like Zelinsky himself said if you talk louder, that doesn’t make you true if the entire Europe and majority of countries talk in unison it doesn’t make it true either Jerry van in the Munich Summit a few days back created one of the most pivotal shifts in the trans Atlantic geopolitics by creating a divergence between US and European view points, the life of which was never seen in history before among many points. The approach towards the Ukraine war was The most important one. He said that Ukraine was not winning against Russia, three years back, two years back, and the same situation is true. Even today is it fit for the losing side to continue a war well, this is a question of ethical dilemma. We have been made to believe to keep fighting the charge of the light brigade, although 500 number kept fighting the allies for against the Nazis, even when highly overpowered freedom fighters have fought for the independence of nations across the world. European countries like Italy and Germany were born. This way the United States was born this way, India, Malaysia and many other countries in Asia were born. This way, the African nations gained independence from the European colonists by fighting. Nelson Mandela kept fighting in the worst of the times. and in the end, they say true, the long triumphs as Ronald Reagan and one of his speeches put that is peace so sweet as to accept it at the pulpit of surrender. The answer is no the brave men have said that it is better for the spine to break before it ends. It is better to die on your feet, then live on your knees and this value holds immense importance in our psyche in our personality. It is of great moral significance. Any person who thinks otherwise is deemed to be a loser, but just think about the other point of you as well. I remember the great boxer Muhammad Ali in one of the interviews had said that an underweight weaker boxer should not be allowed in the same ring as a stronger boxer. That is why we have divisions. The disturbing death of Johnny Evans in 1980 proved this fact beyond doubt. And if you follow boxing enough, you would know the notorious fight where Larry Holmes defeated Tesco, the man with an iron Chin the supporters just like the European nations of today kept encouraging Tesco to keep fighting the referee did not stop and Larry Holmes kept punishing text club until it was such a bloody site that Howard coal one of the most famed boxing commentator permanently left the sport after this horror it is a very bad attitude. If you keep a smaller competitor against a much larger competitor. Just because you enjoy seeing the smaller competitor getting bum into debris. It’s like a cockfight. I’m so also in this fight between Ukraine and Russia Europe nations, McGarry, some advantage, the weapons supplying companies, the hobbies and all other interest wasted interest groups. Benefits out of the lives of the common Ukrainians were drawn into this battle because of bunch of elites at the top decided to play the fight, people say that this war can be stopped tomorrow, but at an unacceptable cost to Ukrainian pride and sovereignty, the question is who gets to decide what cost the Ukrainian people are the Ukrainian people. practically in a position today to say no, I mean, I believe that part of this problem is because Ukraine lacked the deter which a country like Russia or France or UK Because of being a nuclear weapon. State Ukraine lack that because it joined NATO and NSG at the promise of the United States and therefore it is since that time the duty of United States and NATO to protect Ukraine against external threats and I do believe that when President Trump says That we don’t want to fund this blood shed anymore than he should in the same rate agreed to eliminating the highly discrimination, Tory non-proliferation treaty, which divides the nations of the world into nuclear have and have knots if Ukraine had the nuclear capability, perhaps Russia wouldn’t have been so aggressive In fact, all the problems which United States has been trying to sort out with the so called new strategies of the Republican is whether it be in Ukraine or Israel or Afghanistan is nothing but the own creation of American foreign policy decades ago. No wonder they have been recipient of its backlash and the US policy deserves every criticism impossible for that, but returning back to solving the Ukraine, Russia war, presently Ukraine, and president. Zelinsky claims that Russia has been aggressive and The aggressor and suppressing the defender is doing a very wrong thing and that Trump and are doing the dirty work of Putin by supporting is Russia really the immediate aggressive for this war? Will they try to put it in this way that in 2014 Russian and then in 2022, invaded Parts of Eastern Ukraine, which started this war, but if you really see who the aggressive has been extending itself Eastwards slowly stead even after the Cold War ended and better relations were established between Russia and US at the time of prison, George W Bush, and we had Linkin Park concerts in Moscow. Things could have moved in a positive direction, but the intentions of the bureaucracy of NATO in Brussels, confluent with the policy of the United States administration appeared to be returning to dirty tactic. to gain control over power and money, and in 2008, Ukraine, the country nestled in the western arms of Russia was offered. NATO membership. Russia’s Eastern front was now surrounded with members who are being supplied arms and and give a military posture by NATO, what did you expect Russia to do retaliate the more retaliation by crier was certainly a dirty one, but rising Russia under Putin wanted to send a strong message. I think now you can understand who the real aggressive was. if NATO wants this war of attrition to be dragged on and on till the last blood of the common conscripted Ukrainians, well those are powerful people and they can do what they want, but I don’t think it is morally right at all. is more important than the pride and ego of some elite class people, it’s not a question of compromising your values. It’s not a question of living on your knees rather than dying on your feet. It’s a question of common sense north Vietnam and South Vietnam could have remained separate. It was a matter of common sense that they joined and now a prosperous country. That’s how the Berlin wall was pulled down. That’s how cordial relations were established between Japan and the United States, after the worst kind of attack, namely the Adam bomb. Sometimes we have to let go of our swollen pride and sometimes we have to forget the past differences in order to live a peaceful future Singapore in the view of Le when you was wrongly separated from Malaysia for political reasons, and that has greatly wronged the people. Malaysia and Singapore that doesn’t mean that Singapore would have become a permanent enemy of Malaysia like Pakistan has become for India or United States has become for Russia. Sometimes we have to let go of those. unletgoable kinks in order to forge a peaceful future for the next generations. After all the younger generations should not die over the bitterness that the egoists of the older generation created.